---
layout: post
title:  Hacking OpenDCS
author: Geoff Johnson <geoff.jay@gmail.com>
date:   2016-09-27 15:51:17 -0700
description: Summary of the OpenDCS development policies.
categories: opendcs updates
---

This post documents the development policies used in OpenDCS.
<!--break-->

## Code Merging

It's extremely wishful thinking that anyone else is going to want to contribute
but should the situation arise, this is the work flow for contributing to the
master repository:

1. File a bug for the given flaw or feature (if one does not already exist)
   [here](https://github.com/open-dcs/dcs/issues).

2. Clone the main repository (if you haven't already) and initialize with
   git-flow using `git flow init` and accepting the defaults.

3. Start a new feature using `git flow feature start <myfeature>`, or a new
   bug fix using `git flow hotfix start <myhotfix>` (which preferably
   includes the bug number in its name).

4. Write code to fix the bug or add the feature. In any case where tests are
   necessary, the new tests must pass consistently.

5. All code must follow the project coding style (see below).

6. The project must remain buildable with all configure options and pass all
   tests on all platforms.

7. Publish your branch to a public repository and create a new merge request.
   Ask for a review.

8. Rework your code based on suggestions in the review and submit new patches.
   Return to the review step as necessary.

9. Upon approval, pull the latest development branch, rebase your branch on it,
   and push the resulting branch to the public repository. Create a new merge
   request if the previous is no longer valid following the review cycle.

## Clean Commits

Say something...

## Coding Style

Pull in from project...

### Additional General Rules

1. All public symbols which support a Valadoc comment block must have one. This
   comment block must also be sufficient for gobject-introspection to adequately
   introspect the symbol for use in other programming languages.

2. Include a @since statement in the comment block for new symbols.

### Vala-specific Rules

1. Any functions which could block must be async.

2. Use the language-native Errors for error reporting, not return values.

3. Take advantage of properties and their automatic notify signals as much as
   possible (this eliminates the need for most special accessors, mutators, and
   custom signals and is more conventional).

4. Class function blocks should be indented like GNU/Telepathy-GLib if/while
   blocks. It's arguable that these should be aligned in column 0, as in regular
   C functions, but it's too late to change this (as it would make 'git blame'
   useless).

5. Private and internal class data members should begin with a _ (public data
   members and local variables should not begin with a _). This is to make
   non-public data members instantly recognizable as such (which helps
   readability).

6. Private and internal class functions should begin with a _ (public functions
   should not begin with a _). This is to make non-public functions instantly
   recognizable as such (which helps readability).

7. Maximize use of the 'var' variable type. This shortens the declarations where
   it's valid, reducing noise.

   Rarely, the use of 'var' can obscure the effective type of the variable. In
   this case, it's acceptable to provide an explicit type.

8. Use the 'unowned' modifier when it would prevent a non-trivial amount of
   memory allocation. This is most commonly true for strings, arrays, and
   non-reference-counted variables.

   Do not use 'unowned' for reference-counted variables (like objects) since it
   reduces readability without benefit. And, as of this writing, bgo#638199
   forces unowned variables to have an explicit type (preventing the use of
   'var').

9. As in most languages, avoid casting. Casting is usually a sign of an error
   which should be fixed and reduces readability.

10. Refer to non-local variables and methods with their qualified name. Within a
    class function, refer to private data members like 'this._foo' and foreign
    package symbols like 'package_name.symbol'.

    This makes scope immediately clear, helping readability.

11. Use nullable types correctly. This helps readability (and makes the
    programmer's intentions clearer about whether a variable may be null). The
    ultimate goal is for folks to compile correctly with Vala’s strict-non-null
    mode enabled
    (https://wiki.gnome.org/Projects/Vala/Tutorial#Strict_Non-Null_Mode).
    You can compile folks with strict-non-null mode enabled using:
        make VALAFLAGS=--enable-experimental-non-null

12. Place the (private) member variable declaration for a variable which backs a
    property next to the (public) property declaration, rather than at the top
    of the file. This keeps as much of the code pertaining to a property as
    possible in one location.

13. Initialise member variables when declaring them, if possible, rather than in
    a constructor or construct{} block. If it’s not possible to initialise a
    member variable at declaration time (e.g. because its value depends on
    another variable), perform the initialisation in a construct{} block rather
    than a specific constructor. This means that the initialisation doesn’t have
    to be copied between multiple alternate constructors.

14. When iterating over a MultiMap, try to use the map_iterator().
    This is more efficient than iterating over the result of get_keys(),
    then calling get() separately for each key.

## Build Health

1. Before creating a final merge request, the final commit in the series must
   successfully build and pass 'make check' consistently.

2. TODO insert step here about CI building successfully. Or not.

## Profiling OpenDCS

OpenDCS has (actually, will have) various profiling points throughout its
startup code, in order to be able to profile the startup process. In order to
use this:

1. Compile dcs with `--enable-profiling`.
2. `strace -ttt -f -o /tmp/logfile dcs # or some other OpenDCS program`
3. `python util/plot-timeline.py -o output.png /tmp/logfile`
4. Examine output.png for obvious problems

This is based on Federico Mena Quintero’s plot-timeline.py. The script has been
included in the project repository.
